Adding devices to Matter: add prerequisites (#30836)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/matter.markdown

Running Matter on a Home Assistant Core installation is not supported.

## Adding a Matter device to Home Assistant

Each Matter network is called a fabric. Each home automation controller that controls Matter devices has its own "fabric". You can add devices directly to the fabric of your Home Assistant instance, or share them from another fabric (ie Google, Apple) to Home Assistant's fabric. We're going to explore all these options below.

### Prerequisites

> - On the device packaging, check for the Matter logo and for either the Wi-Fi or the Thread logo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the device packaging, check for both the Matter logo and for either the Wi-Fi or the Thread logo.
```

- Check if the QR code is only on the packaging or if it is also on the device.
  - If it is only on the packaging, snap a picture of the QR code and the device and store it in a save place.

>   - If you lose the QR code and disconnect the device at some point, you won't be able to connect to that device again without the QR code.

Reviewer: Note that almost every device has it also printed on the device, and some even laser cut it on the device (so it wont fade over time). Also there are a few exceptions known, such as WiZ lights, where you enable Matter support for their app and you get the QR/code generated from within their app, the same as Matter bridges.

Not sure if its worthwhile mentioning that here?

Author: I would prefer to keep it short here. The most important is to keep a copy of the code when it is only on the packaging. The ones from the app and from the device can be retrieved. But if it's only on the packaging, finding that code again might be impossible.

- In Home Assistant, have the Matter integration installed.
  - Go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & services**" %}.
  - Add the **Matter (BETA)** integration.
  - When prompted to **Select the connection method**:
    - If you run Home Assistant OS in a regular setup: select **Submit**.
      - This will install the official Matter server add-on.

>     - If you are already running the Matter server in another add-on, a custom container, or natively:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If you are already running the Matter server in another add-on, or a custom container:
```

Reviewer: The Matter server cant be run other than add-on (recommended) or container (only if you are technically experienced)

      - Deselect the checkbox, then Select **Submit**.
      - In the next step, provide the URL to your Matter server.
- Have either an Android or iPhone ready and Bluetooth enabled. For information why Bluetooth is required, refer to the section on [Bluetooth used during commissioning](#bluetooth-used-during-commissioning):
  - Android:
    - Have an Android phone (a full Android, not F-Droid).
    - Have the Home Assistant Companion app installed.
    - Have Google Home app installed on the Android.
    - We are not going to add the new device to Google Home. The app is needed because Google included the Matter SDK there.

>     - If you are using Thread: Make sure there is a Thread border router device (Nest Hub v2 or Nest Wi-Fi Pro) added to Home Assistant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If you are using Thread: Make sure there is a Thread border router device (Nest Hub v2 or Nest Wi-Fi Pro) present in your home network.
```

  - iPhone
    - Version 16 or higher

>     - If you are using Thread: Make sure there is a Thread border router device (HomePod Mini or V2, Apple TV 4K) added to Home Assistant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If you are using Thread: Make sure there is a Thread border router device (HomePod Mini or V2, Apple TV 4K) present in your home network.
```

>       - For instruction on how to add these devices to Home Assistant, refer to the instructions on [adding a HomeKit device](/integrations/homekit_controller/#adding-a-homekit-device-via-ethernet-or-wi-fi).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Maybe we should link here to the Thread documentation or any other documentation how thread border routers work and how we utilize them ?

Author: Agreed. I was thinking about that, too. Can we add the links once we double-checked/updated the Thread docs? I want to be sure they are updated before linking there. Making a note for another PR.

> - If you are using Wi-Fi: Most Matter devices use the 2.4&nbsp;GHz frequency for Wi-Fi. For this reason, make sure your phone is in the same 2.4&nbsp;GHz network where you want to operate your devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you are adding a Wi-Fi based Matter device: Matter devices use the 2.4&nbsp;GHz frequency for Wi-Fi. For this reason, make sure your phone is in the same 2.4&nbsp;GHz network where you want to operate your devices.
```

3. On the **Devices** tab, select the **Add device** button.
4. Select **Add Matter device**.
5. Scan the QR-code of the Matter device with your phone camera or select **More options...** to manually enter the Commission code.
6. Select **Add to Home Assistant**.
   - This starts the commissioning process which may take a few minutes.
7. If you're adding a test board or beta device, you might get a prompt about an **Uncertified Accessory**. In this dialog, select **Add Anyway**.
8. If prompted, enter a custom **Accessory Name**.
   - You can type whatever you like here.
   - This is an internal reference for iOS. It won't be visible in Home Assistant.
   - After entering a name, select **Continue**.
9. Once the process is complete, select **Done**.
   - You are now redirected to the device page within Home Assistant. It is ready for use.

<lite-youtube videoid="8y79Kq3QfCQ" videotitle="Add Matter device via iOS app in Home Assistant"></lite-youtube>

### To add a new device using the Android Companion app

This will use the Bluetooth connection of your phone to add the device.

1. Open The Home Assistant app on your phone.

> 2. Power up the device by plugging it in or add a battery. Most devices will no go into pairing mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Power up the device by plugging it in or add a battery. Most devices will now go into pairing mode.
```

   - Scan the QR code.
   - When prompted to **Choose an app**, make sure to select Home Assistant.
   - Once the process is complete, select **Done**, then select **Add device**.
4. If you did not see a pop-up, go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & Services**" %}.
   - On the **Devices** tab, select the **Add device** button.
   - Select **Add Matter device**.
   - Scan the QR-code of the Matter device with your phone camera or select **Setup without QR-code** to manually enter the commission code.
      - This starts the commissioning process which may take a few minutes.
   - If you're adding a test board (e.g. ESP32 running the example apps) and commissioning fails, you might need to take some actions in the Google Developer console, have a look at any instructions for your test device.
   - Once the process is complete, select **Done**.
5. To view the device details, go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & Services**" %} and select the **Matter** integration.
6. By default, the device is called **Matter**. To rename it, select the three-dots and **Rename** the device.

>    ![image](/images/integrations/matter/matter-android-rename.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. By default, the device gets a factory specified name. To rename it, select the three-dots and **Rename** the device.
   ![image](/images/integrations/matter/matter-android-rename.png)
```

Reviewer: A new device is not called Matter but just whatever has been determined for the device. Default/common is a combination of the Manufacturer name and model name but some devices have a custom name defined or even fallback to just the device type.

Reviewer: The screenshot is from renaming the integration (instance), which is always just Matter.
